# Steady-State Volcanism

This repository analyzes steady-state volcanism in frequently erupting oceanic hotspots (Iceland, La Réunion, Hawaiʻi, and the western Galápagos). We examine how near-constant long-term eruption rates are punctuated by shorter-term cycles that rebalance erupted volumes, offering insight into maximum expected eruptive output and implications for volcanic hazard assessment

## Evaluating Steady-State Volcanism

We want to predict variations in eruptions, given:
- Average steady-state rate (Q)
- Date and volume of previous eruptions (observed data)
- Cumulative volume (sum of previous eruption volumes)

This repo showcases 3 methods:

1. **Q-Line Fitting**
2. **Deterministic Time Interval**
3. Stochastic Forecast

## Citing this Work

If you use this code or associated algorithms, please cite our paper. Thank you!

> Galetto, F., Asfora, B., and Pritchard, M. E. (2025). *Evaluating steady-state volcanism in Iceland, La Réunion, Hawaiʻi and western Galápagos: Connections with volcanic hazards and future perspectives.* Manuscript under review.

Note: this citation will be updated upon publication decision.

``` 
 @unpublished{GalettoAsforaPritchard2025,
  author    = {Galetto, Federico and Asfora, Beatriz and Pritchard, Matthew E.},
  title     = {Evaluating steady-state volcanism in Iceland, La R{\'e}union, Hawai{\textquotesingle}i and western Gal{\'a}pagos: connections with volcanic hazards and future perspectives},
  year      = {2025},
  note      = {Manuscript under review}
}
```




## Code Structure

```
volcano/
├── classes
│   ├── basicfun.py
│   ├── collectdata.py
│   ├── eruption.py
│   ├── myplots.py
│   └── subset.py
├── LICENSE
├── plots
│   ├── HistoricalData
│   ├── Method01
│   ├── Method02
│   ├── Method03
├── rawdata
│   ├── TableGalapagos.xlsx
│   ├── TableHawaii.xlsx
│   ├── TableIceland.xlsx
│   └── TablePiton.xlsx
├── README.md
├── requirements.txt
├── scripts
│   ├── historical_data.py
│   └── prediction_data.py
├── tests
│   ├── test_basicfun.py
│   └── test_collectdata.py
└── VolcanoWriteUp.pdf
```

* `classes/` main classes used in the project, in hierarchical order:
  * `myplots.py` functions for plotting data and results, with preset styles for consistency.
  * `collectdata.py` collects, processes and organize data from the xlsx raw files.
  * `subset.py` data subset delimited by user-defined first and last eruptions. Contains data (volume and dates) 
as well as period's limits for eacy access (first/last eruption id, dates, volume), stats, timelines and prediction methods.
Official periods are identified by a positive 'label' attribute, while unofficial periods are identified by a negative 'label' attribute.
  * `eruption.py` contains the `Eruption` class, which is used to represent each volcanic eruption and its properties; used by other classes to pass and retrieve information about a single eruption
  * `basicfun.py` basic functions used across the project (e.g. computing of stats and error, data transformation functions).

* `scripts/` contains the scripts that generate the plots and perform data analysis.
  * `historical_data.py`: generates plots using historical data collected and processed by `VolcanoData` class. 
  * `prediction_data.py`: generates plots for all three prediction methods.
Choose which volcano to plot by setting the `volcano_id` on top of the script.
* `tests/` contains unit tests scripts for the classes.
* `plots/` output plots generated by the scripts will be saved here
* `rawdata/` place raw data files used in the project in this folder.
